README.md, before:

# ZenStack GraphQL Plugin

This plugin generates a complete GraphQL schema with relations, filtering, sorting, and pagination. Saving you hours of boilerplate code to match your database models with you graphql server.

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL--3.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

## Why Use This Plugin?

- **Zero Boilerplate**: Go from data model to full GraphQL API schema using the [Zenstack](https://zenstack.dev/)
- **Relationship Handling**: All your model relations become GraphQL connections automatically
- **Modern API Features**: Built-in filtering, sorting and Relay-compatible pagination
- **Customization That Makes Sense**: Rename fields, customize types, hide sensitive data, ignore generations...

## 🚀 How to use

Install with your favorite package manager:

```bash
# Using bun
bun add zenstack-graphql -D

# Using npm
npm install zenstack-graphql --save-dev

# Using yarn
yarn add zenstack-graphql -D

#...
```

Add to your schema.zmodel file:
> Just a base example

```zmodel
plugin graphql {
    provider = 'zenstack-graphql'
    output = './schema.graphql'
}
```

Generate your GraphQL schema:

```bash
zenstack generate
```

That's it! Your GraphQL schema is ready to use with any GraphQL server.

## ⚙️ Customization Options

Keep your GraphQL schema clean to your needs:

```zmodel
plugin graphql {
    // Basic settings
    output = './schema.graphql'

    // Use your preferred naming style
    fieldNaming = 'snake_case'  // Fields become like_this
    typeNaming = 'PascalCase'   // Types become LikeThis

    // Customize scalar type mappings
    scalarTypes = {
        DateTime: 'Date',      // Use Date instead of DateTime
        Json: 'JSONObject'     // Use JSONObject instead of JSON
    }

    // Turn features on/off as needed
    connectionTypes = true     // Add Relay pagination support
    generateFilters = true     // Add filtering capabilities
    generateSorts = true       // Add sorting functionality
}
```

### 🔧 Fine-tune with Attributes

Control exactly what appears in your API:

```zmodel
model User {
    id          Int      @id
    email       String   @unique

    // Hide sensitive fields from the API
    password    String   @graphql.ignore

    // Rename fields for better API design
    emailAddress String  @graphql.name("email")

    // Add clear descriptions for your API docs
    fullName    String   @graphql.description("User's complete name")

    // Mark fields for filtering and sorting
    createdAt   DateTime @graphql.sortable @graphql.filterable

    // Model-level customization
    @@graphql.name("Member")                  // Rename the type
    @@graphql.description("Platform member")  // Add type description
    @@graphql.connection(pageSize: 20)        // Configure pagination
}
```

## 📋 Configuration Reference

Here's a complete reference of all available options:

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `output` | `string` | `'./schema.graphql'` | Output path for the generated schema |
| `scalarTypes` | `object` | *See below* | Custom mappings for scalar types |
| `connectionTypes` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate Relay-compatible connection types |
| `generateEnums` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate GraphQL enum types |
| `generateScalars` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate GraphQL scalar types |
| `generateFilters` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate filter input types |
| `generateSorts` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate sort input types |
| `fieldNaming` | `string` | `'camelCase'` | Field naming convention |
| `typeNaming` | `string` | `'PascalCase'` | Type naming convention |
| `includeRelations` | `boolean` | `true` | Include model relations in schema |

Default scalar mappings:
```
{
  DateTime: 'DateTime',
  Json: 'JSON',
  Decimal: 'Decimal',
  Bytes: 'String'
}
```

> You can see a example on [custom-naming](examples/custom-naming)

## 🏗️ How It Works

The plugin transforms your ZModel schema into a GraphQL schema through these steps:

1. **Parsing**: Reads your data models and extracts entities, relationships, and attributes
2. **Type Generation**: Creates GraphQL types that match your data structure
3. **Relation Processing**: Maps your model relationships to GraphQL connections
4. **Connection Generation**: Builds Relay-compatible pagination support
5. **Schema Assembly**: Puts everything together into a complete GraphQL schema
6. **Output**: Writes the final schema to your specified location

> All this happens automatically when you run `zenstack generate`, you can see more about on [Zenstack Plugin System](https://zenstack.dev/docs/the-complete-guide/part2/)!

## 📝 Use case example: Blog Schema

Here's how easy it is to create a blog API:

### ZModel Input

First, define your data models:

```zmodel
datasource db {
  provider = "postgresql"
  url = env("DATABASE_URL")
}

generator client {
  provider = "prisma-client-js"
}

plugin graphql {
  provider = "zenstack-graphql"
  output = "./schema.graphql"
}

model User {
  id        Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
  email     String  @unique
  name      String?
  posts     Post[]
}

model Post {
  id        Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
  title     String
  content   String?
  published Boolean @default(false)
  author    User    @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id])
  authorId  Int
}
```

### Generated GraphQL Schema

Running `zenstack generate` automatically produces this GraphQL schema:

```graphql
"""An object with a unique identifier"""
interface Node {
  """The unique identifier for this object"""
  id: ID!
}

"""A date-time string at UTC, such as 2007-12-03T10:15:30Z"""
scalar DateTime

"""The `JSON` scalar type represents JSON values as specified by ECMA-404"""
scalar JSON

"""An arbitrary-precision Decimal type"""
scalar Decimal

# Base model types
type User {
  id: Int!
  email: String!
  name: String
  posts: [Post!]!
}

type Post {
  id: Int!
  title: String!
  content: String
  published: Boolean!
  author: User!
  authorId: Int!
}

# Pagination support (Relay-compatible)
type PageInfo {
  hasNextPage: Boolean!
  hasPreviousPage: Boolean!
  startCursor: String
  endCursor: String
}

# Connection types for related lists
type UserConnection {
  pageInfo: PageInfo!
  edges: [UserEdge!]!
  totalCount: Int!
}

type UserEdge {
  node: User!
  cursor: String!
}

type PostConnection {
  pageInfo: PageInfo!
  edges: [PostEdge!]!
  totalCount: Int!
}

type PostEdge {
  node: Post!
  cursor: String!
}

# Filtering and sorting inputs
input StringFilterInput {
  equals: String
  not: String
  in: [String!]
  notIn: [String!]
  contains: String
  startsWith: String
  endsWith: String
}

input BooleanFilterInput {
  equals: Boolean
  not: Boolean
}

# ... and more generated types for complete API functionality
```

This simple schema definition gives you a GraphQL API with:

- **Custom Scalars**: DateTime, JSON, and Decimal scalar types
- **Base Types**: User and Post types with their relationships
- **Relay Connections**: Connection types for efficient pagination
- **Filtering**: Filter inputs for complex data queries
- **Sorting**: Sort inputs for ordering results
- **Standard Interfaces**: Node interface for unified type handling

No need to write connection types, or filtering logic, everything is automatically generated from your data model.

> Check the [examples](./examples/) directory for more sample use cases!

## 🤝 Contributing

Liked this plugin? Want to make it better? Contributions are always welcome! You can open a issue or pull requests on this repository 🧡

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0) - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.


### Built with 🧡 by the Hakutaku team.

Commit message:

✨ (README.md): add GraphQL server example to showcase plugin usage

README.md, after:

# ZenStack GraphQL Plugin

This plugin generates a complete GraphQL schema with relations, filtering, sorting, and pagination. Saving you hours of boilerplate code to match your database models with you graphql server.

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL--3.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)

## Why Use This Plugin?

- **Zero Boilerplate**: Go from data model to full GraphQL API schema using the [Zenstack](https://zenstack.dev/)
- **Relationship Handling**: All your model relations become GraphQL connections automatically
- **Modern API Features**: Built-in filtering, sorting and Relay-compatible pagination
- **Customization That Makes Sense**: Rename fields, customize types, hide sensitive data, ignore generations...

## 🚀 How to use

> TL;DR - See the [graphql-server example](./examples/graphql-server/) with full code example

Install with your favorite package manager:

```bash
# Using bun
bun add zenstack-graphql -D

# Using npm
npm install zenstack-graphql --save-dev

# Using yarn
yarn add zenstack-graphql -D

#...
```

Add to your schema.zmodel file:
> Just a base example

```zmodel
plugin graphql {
    provider = 'zenstack-graphql'
    output = './schema.graphql'
}
```

Generate your GraphQL schema:

```bash
zenstack generate
```

That's it! Your GraphQL schema is ready to use with any GraphQL server.

## ⚙️ Customization Options

Keep your GraphQL schema clean to your needs:

```zmodel
plugin graphql {
    // Basic settings
    output = './schema.graphql'

    // Use your preferred naming style
    fieldNaming = 'snake_case'  // Fields become like_this
    typeNaming = 'PascalCase'   // Types become LikeThis

    // Customize scalar type mappings
    scalarTypes = {
        DateTime: 'Date',      // Use Date instead of DateTime
        Json: 'JSONObject'     // Use JSONObject instead of JSON
    }

    // Turn features on/off as needed
    connectionTypes = true     // Add Relay pagination support
    generateFilters = true     // Add filtering capabilities
    generateSorts = true       // Add sorting functionality
}
```

### 🔧 Fine-tune with Attributes

Control exactly what appears in your API:

```zmodel
model User {
    id          Int      @id
    email       String   @unique

    // Hide sensitive fields from the API
    password    String   @graphql.ignore

    // Rename fields for better API design
    emailAddress String  @graphql.name("email")

    // Add clear descriptions for your API docs
    fullName    String   @graphql.description("User's complete name")

    // Mark fields for filtering and sorting
    createdAt   DateTime @graphql.sortable @graphql.filterable

    // Model-level customization
    @@graphql.name("Member")                  // Rename the type
    @@graphql.description("Platform member")  // Add type description
    @@graphql.connection(pageSize: 20)        // Configure pagination
}
```

## 📋 Configuration Reference

Here's a complete reference of all available options:

| Option | Type | Default | Description |
|--------|------|---------|-------------|
| `output` | `string` | `'./schema.graphql'` | Output path for the generated schema |
| `scalarTypes` | `object` | *See below* | Custom mappings for scalar types |
| `connectionTypes` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate Relay-compatible connection types |
| `generateEnums` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate GraphQL enum types |
| `generateScalars` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate GraphQL scalar types |
| `generateFilters` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate filter input types |
| `generateSorts` | `boolean` | `true` | Generate sort input types |
| `fieldNaming` | `string` | `'camelCase'` | Field naming convention |
| `typeNaming` | `string` | `'PascalCase'` | Type naming convention |
| `includeRelations` | `boolean` | `true` | Include model relations in schema |

Default scalar mappings:
```
{
  DateTime: 'DateTime',
  Json: 'JSON',
  Decimal: 'Decimal',
  Bytes: 'String'
}
```

> You can see a example on [custom-naming](examples/custom-naming)

## 🏗️ How It Works

The plugin transforms your ZModel schema into a GraphQL schema through these steps:

1. **Parsing**: Reads your data models and extracts entities, relationships, and attributes
2. **Type Generation**: Creates GraphQL types that match your data structure
3. **Relation Processing**: Maps your model relationships to GraphQL connections
4. **Connection Generation**: Builds Relay-compatible pagination support
5. **Schema Assembly**: Puts everything together into a complete GraphQL schema
6. **Output**: Writes the final schema to your specified location

> All this happens automatically when you run `zenstack generate`, you can see more about on [Zenstack Plugin System](https://zenstack.dev/docs/the-complete-guide/part2/)!

## 📝 Use case example: Blog Schema

Here's how easy it is to create a blog API:

### ZModel Input

First, define your data models:

```zmodel
datasource db {
  provider = "postgresql"
  url = env("DATABASE_URL")
}

generator client {
  provider = "prisma-client-js"
}

plugin graphql {
  provider = "zenstack-graphql"
  output = "./schema.graphql"
}

model User {
  id        Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
  email     String  @unique
  name      String?
  posts     Post[]
}

model Post {
  id        Int     @id @default(autoincrement())
  title     String
  content   String?
  published Boolean @default(false)
  author    User    @relation(fields: [authorId], references: [id])
  authorId  Int
}
```

### Generated GraphQL Schema

Running `zenstack generate` automatically produces this GraphQL schema:

```graphql
"""An object with a unique identifier"""
interface Node {
  """The unique identifier for this object"""
  id: ID!
}

"""A date-time string at UTC, such as 2007-12-03T10:15:30Z"""
scalar DateTime

"""The `JSON` scalar type represents JSON values as specified by ECMA-404"""
scalar JSON

"""An arbitrary-precision Decimal type"""
scalar Decimal

# Base model types
type User {
  id: Int!
  email: String!
  name: String
  posts: [Post!]!
}

type Post {
  id: Int!
  title: String!
  content: String
  published: Boolean!
  author: User!
  authorId: Int!
}

# Pagination support (Relay-compatible)
type PageInfo {
  hasNextPage: Boolean!
  hasPreviousPage: Boolean!
  startCursor: String
  endCursor: String
}

# Connection types for related lists
type UserConnection {
  pageInfo: PageInfo!
  edges: [UserEdge!]!
  totalCount: Int!
}

type UserEdge {
  node: User!
  cursor: String!
}

type PostConnection {
  pageInfo: PageInfo!
  edges: [PostEdge!]!
  totalCount: Int!
}

type PostEdge {
  node: Post!
  cursor: String!
}

# Filtering and sorting inputs
input StringFilterInput {
  equals: String
  not: String
  in: [String!]
  notIn: [String!]
  contains: String
  startsWith: String
  endsWith: String
}

input BooleanFilterInput {
  equals: Boolean
  not: Boolean
}

# ... and more generated types for complete API functionality
```

This simple schema definition gives you a GraphQL API with:

- **Custom Scalars**: DateTime, JSON, and Decimal scalar types
- **Base Types**: User and Post types with their relationships
- **Relay Connections**: Connection types for efficient pagination
- **Filtering**: Filter inputs for complex data queries
- **Sorting**: Sort inputs for ordering results
- **Standard Interfaces**: Node interface for unified type handling

No need to write connection types, or filtering logic, everything is automatically generated from your data model.

> Check the [examples](./examples/) directory for more sample use cases!

## 🤝 Contributing

Liked this plugin? Want to make it better? Contributions are always welcome! You can open a issue or pull requests on this repository 🧡

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0) - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.


### Built with 🧡 by the Hakutaku team.
